Abstract

## Background

Self-management programs for patients with heart failure can reduce
hospitalizations and mortality. However, no programs have analyzed their
usefulness for patients with low literacy. We compared the efficacy of a
heart failure self-management program designed for patients with low
literacy versus usual care.

## Methods

We performed a 12-month randomized controlled trial. From November 2001
to April 2003, we enrolled participants aged 30--80, who had heart
failure and took furosemide. Intervention patients received education on
self-care emphasizing daily weight measurement, diuretic dose
self-adjustment, and symptom recognition and response. Picture-based
educational materials, a digital scale, and scheduled telephone
follow-up were provided to reinforce adherence. Control patients
received a generic heart failure brochure and usual care. Primary
outcomes were combined hospitalization or death, and heart
failure-related quality of life.

## Results

123 patients (64 control, 59 intervention) participated; 41% had
inadequate literacy. Patients in the intervention group had a lower rate
of hospitalization or death (crude incidence rate ratio (IRR) = 0.69; CI
0.4, 1.2; adjusted IRR = 0.53; CI 0.32, 0.89). This difference was
larger for patients with low literacy (IRR = 0.39; CI 0.16, 0.91) than
for higher literacy (IRR = 0.56; CI 0.3, 1.04), but the interaction was
not statistically significant. At 12 months, more patients in the
intervention group reported monitoring weights daily (79% vs. 29%, p \<
0.0001). After adjusting for baseline demographic and treatment
differences, we found no difference in heart failure-related quality of
life at 12 months (difference = -2; CI -5, +9).

## Conclusion

A primary care-based heart failure self-management program designed for
patients with low literacy reduces the risk of hospitalizations or
death.

# Results

## Patients

We screened 919 patients on furosemide between November 2001 and April
2003. 127 met eligibility criteria and agreed to participate (Figure
[2](#)). Of those not enrolled, 407 did not have heart failure according
to their physician, 367 did not meet eligibility criteria and 27
declined to participate.

Of those randomized to the control group, 1 never returned after the
first visit, 1 withdrew during the study and 4 died during the study.
Follow-up was completed for all of the remaining participants (98%)
(Figure [3](#)). Of those randomized to the intervention group, 3 never
returned after the first visit, 4 withdrew during the study and 3 died
during the study. Follow-up was completed for all of the remaining
participants (93%).

At baseline, most characteristics were similar between the two groups
(Table [1](#)). However, the control group had more participants with
hypertension, fewer with diabetes, and fewer men. Of heart failure
related characteristics, the control group had more participants with
systolic dysfunction, and taking β-blockers. The intervention group had
more participants taking ACE inhibitors or ARBs, and digoxin. Regardless
of these differences, none were statistically significant. The control
group did have statistically significantly higher baseline MLHF scores
representing worse symptoms at baseline.

## Hospitalization or death

There were 68 hospitalizations (65) or deaths (3) in the intervention
group and 111 (107 hospitalizations, 4 deaths) in the control group. The
crude all-cause hospital admission or death incidence rate ratio (IRR)
was 0.69 (95% CI 0.40, 1.19). After adjusting for age, gender, use of
ACE inhibitor or ARB, use of a β-blocker, presence of hypertension, and
baseline MLHF, intervention patients were less likely to have the
outcome (IRR = 0.53; 95% CI 0.32, 0.89). 61% of patients in the control
group had at least one hospitalization or died, and 42% of patients in
the intervention group had at least 1 hospitalization or died (p =
0.13).

## Cardiac hospitalization

39% of patients in the control group and 34% of patients in the
intervention group had at least one hospitalization for cardiac causes
(p = 0.55). The unadjusted IRR was 0.79 (95% CI 0.42, 1.5). After
adjusting for baseline differences, the IRR was 0.85 (95% CI 0.44, 1.7).

## Heart failure-related quality of life

In unadjusted analysis, the control group, on average, improved 5 points
on the MLHF and the intervention group improved by 1 point. The
difference was not statistically significant (3.5 points, 95% CI 11, -4,
p = 0.36). After adjusting for baseline differences between the groups,
the difference was 2 points (95% CI 9, -5, p = 0.59) suggesting no
effect on heart failure-related quality of life.

## Other outcomes

### Knowledge

Heart failure related knowledge improved more in the intervention group
than in the control group. Mean difference in score improvement was 12
percentage points (95% CI 6, 18; p \< 0.001).

### Self-efficacy

Heart failure self-efficacy improved more in the intervention group than
in the control group. Mean difference in score improvement was 2 points
(95% CI 0.7, 3.1; p = 0.0026).

### Self-care behavior

Significantly more patients in the intervention group than in the
control group reported daily weight measurement at 12 months (79% vs.
29%, p \< 0.001).

## Subgroup analyses according to literacy

Twenty-four patients in each group had inadequate literacy based on the
S-TOFHLA (Table [2](#)). Among these patients, there was no difference
in quality of life score in unadjusted and adjusted analyses (difference
= -1.6; 95% CI -15, 12); p = 0.81). For the combined outcome of
hospitalization or death, the unadjusted IRR was 0.77 (95% CI 0.30,
1.94). After adjusting for baseline differences, the IRR was 0.39 (95%
CI 0.16, 0.91).

Seventy-five patients had marginal or adequate literacy based on the
S-TOFHLA. We found no difference in quality of life score in unadjusted
and adjusted analyses (difference = -4.2; 95% CI -14, 6; p = 0.40).
Among patients in the higher literacy group, the unadjusted IRR for
hospitalization or death was 0.65 (95% CI 0.33, 1.3). After adjusting
for baseline differences, the IRR was 0.56 (95% CI 0.30, 1.04). We did
not find a statistically significant effect modification between
literacy and the intervention.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Baseline characteristics.
:::

  Variable                                   Control (n = 64)   Intervention (n = 59)   P value
  ------------------------------------------ ------------------ ----------------------- ---------
  Mean Age, years (SD)                       62 (11)            63 (9)                  0.37
  African American, %                        55                 54                      0.96
  Male, %                                    41                 58                      0.059
  Education, years (SD)                      9.9 (2.6)          9.1 (3.2)               0.17
  Income \<15,000/yr, %                      67                 69                      0.60
  Medicaid, %                                33                 34                      0.90
  Medicare, %                                72                 71                      0.61
  Inadequate Literacy, %                     39                 42                      0.43
  Hypertension, %                            89                 86                      0.66
  Diabetes, %                                52                 59                      0.39
  Creatinine, mg/dl                          1.3                1.2                     0.19
  Time with heart failure, mean years (SD)   7 (8)              6 (9)                   0.75
  NYHA class, %                                                                         0.66
   II                                        47                 53                      
   III                                       51                 40                      
   IV                                        2                  7                       
  Systolic dysfunction, %                    44                 39                      0.73
  Medications, %                                                                        
  ACEI or ARB                                69                 78                      0.25
  β-blocker                                  72                 54                      0.04
  Digoxin                                    19                 25                      0.39
  Knowledge, mean percent                    57                 55                      0.67
  Self-efficacy, mean score                  22                 22                      0.64
  Daily weight measurement, %                15                 13                      0.64
  HFQOL score, mean score (range 0--105)     57                 45                      0.0028

NYHA: New York Heart Association; ACEI: Angiotensin Converting Enzyme
Inhibitor; HFQOL: Heart Failure-Related Quality of Life
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Baseline characteristics for the subgroup with low literacy.
:::

  Variable                                   Control (n = 24)   Intervention (n = 24)   P value
  ------------------------------------------ ------------------ ----------------------- ---------
  Mean Age, years (SD)                       65 (10)            68 (8)                  0.38
  African American, %                        71                 71                      1.0
  Male, %                                    46                 71                      0.079
  Education, years (SD)                      8.6 (2.9)          6.3 (2.9)               0.009
  Income \<15,000/yr, %                      83                 88                      0.33
  Medicaid, %                                45                 45                      1.0
  Medicare, %                                75                 79                      0.73
  Inadequate Literacy, %                     39                 42                      0.43
  Hypertension, %                            92                 83                      0.38
  Diabetes, %                                63                 71                      0.54
  Creatinine, mg/dl                          1.4                1.3                     0.43
  Time with heart failure, mean years (SD)   7 (7)              8 (11)                  0.63
  NYHA class, %                                                                         0.55
   II                                        58                 50                      
   III                                       42                 46                      
   IV                                        0                  4                       
  Systolic dysfunction, %                    38                 42                      0.55
  Medications, %                                                                        
  ACEI or ARB, %                             83                 79                      0.14
  b-blocker, %                               71                 42                      0.04
  Digoxin, %                                 17                 21                      0.39
  Knowledge, mean percent                    46                 49                      0.40
  Self-efficacy, mean score                  21                 21                      0.78
  Daily weight measurement, %                17                 4                       0.16
  HFQOL score, mean score (range 0--105)     51.9               42                      0.11

NYHA: New York Heart Association; ACEI: Angiotensin Converting Enzyme
Inhibitor; HFQOL: Heart Failure-Related Quality of Life
::::
