Abstract

## Background

Despite the fact that numerous medications have been introduced to treat
renal colic, none has been proven to relieve the pain rapidly and
thoroughly. In this study, we aimed at comparing the effects of
intravenous lidocaine versus intravenous morphine in patients suffering
from renal colic.

## Methods

In a prospective randomized double-blind clinical trial performed in the
emergency department of Imam Reza educational hospital of Tabriz, Iran,
we studied 240 patients, 18--65 years old, who were referred due to
renal colic. Patients were divided into two groups. In group I (120
people) single-dose intravenous lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) was administered
and in group II (120 people) single-dose intravenous morphine
(0.1 mg/kg) was administered slowly. Visual Analogue Pain Scale (VAS)
was recorded while admission, 5, 10, 15 and 30 minutes after injection.
Statistical data and results were studied using descriptive statistics
as percentage and Mean ± SD. To compare the response to treatment,
Mann--Whitney *U*-test was used in two groups. Consequently, the data
were analyzed using the SPSS16 software.

## Results

Pain score measured in two groups five minutes after the injection of
lidocaine and morphine were 65 % and 53 % respectively (95% CI 0.60 -
0.69, CI 0.48 -- 0.57, p = 0.0002).108 (90 %) patients (95 % CI 0.84 --
0.95) from group I and 84 (70%) patients (95 % CI 0.62 - 0.78) from
group II responded appropriately at the end of the complete treatment.
The difference was statistically significant (p = 0.0001).

## Conclusions

Changing the smooth muscle tone and reducing the transmission of
afferent sensory pathways, lidocaine causes a significant reduction in
pain.

## Trial registration

Clinical Trials IRCT138901042496N3

# Results

Eighty six patients of studied samples were male and thirty four were
female in group I. In group II, ninety patients were male and thirty
were female. There was no statistically significant difference between
them regarding gender distribution (p = 0.559) (Table [1](#)).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Demographics characteristics of both groups
:::

                                            **Group I**                   **Group II**    ***P*-value**   
  ----------------------------------------- ----------------------------- --------------- --------------- -------
  Sex                                       Male                          71.7 %          28.3 %          0.559
                                            Female                        75 %            25 %             
  age                                       35.23 ± 12.37                 37.71 ± 11.08   0.104           
  Hydronephrosis                            left kidney                   52 (43.3 %)     52 (43.3 %)     0.684
                                            right kidney                  57 (47.5 %)     53 (44.2 %)      
                                            did not have hydronephrosis   11 (9.2 %)      15 (12.5 %)      
  history of kidney stone and renal colic   Recurrent Stone               49 (41.2 %)     64 (53.3 %)     0.06
                                            First Stone                   70 (58.8 %)     56 (46.7 %)      
  Stone side                                right kidney                  60 (50 %)       57 (47.5 %)     0.698
                                            left kidney                   60 (50 %)       63 (52.5 %)      
::::

Mean ages of the patients were 35.23 ± 12.37 years and
37.71 ± 11.08 years in group I and II respectively. The differences was
not statistically significant (p = 0.104) (Table [1](#)).

There was no statistically significant difference between mean patient
pain scores before drug administration of two groups (p = 0.365). Pain
relief in lidocaine group was statistically significant compared to the
morphine group (p = 0.0001) (Table [2](#)).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Comparison of the mean value of pain reduction between two groups
:::

                **Group I**   **Group II**   ***P*-value**
  ------------- ------------- -------------- ---------------
  primary VAS   9.65 ± 0.88   9.74 ± 0.63    0.365
  VAS^5^        3.18 ± 2.27   4.45 ± 2.16    0.0001
  VAS^10^       1.83 ± 1.59   2.89 ± 2.07    0.0001
  VAS^15^       1.37 ± 1.32   2.55 ± 1.52    0.0001
  VAS^30^       1.13 ± 1.15   2.23 ± 1.57    0.0001
::::

108 patients (90 %) in group I responded to lidocaine successfully
whereas in group II, 84 patients (70 %) responded properly to morphine,
at the end of the study it was demonstrated that there were more
considerable respond and pain relief in lidocaine group which was
statistically significant (p = 0.0001).

In the present study, patients were also evaluated regarding having
history of kidney stone, renal colic as (with a history of referring to
the hospital or recurrent stone, and first referral-first stone), side
effects (all recorded side effects in both groups were mild and
temporary), stone side and hydronephrosis (Tables [1](#),[3](#)).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Percentage of patients reporting side effects
:::

  ---------- --------------------- --------------
  Group I    perioral numbness     3 (2.5 %)
             transient dizziness   10 (8.3 %)
             dysrathria            2 (1.7 %)
             Without side effect   105 (87.5 %)
  Group II   hypotension           3 (2.5 %)
             vertigo               2 (1.7 %)
             nausea                9 (7.5 %)
             vomiting              2 (1.6 %)
             Without side effect   104 (86.7 %)
  ---------- --------------------- --------------
::::
