Abstract

## Purpose

To examine the pooled per-protocol ocular end points from two
conjunctival allergen challenge (CAC) clinical trials of the dual-action
antihistamine bepotastine besilate ophthalmic solution (BBOS) 1.5%.

## Methods

Two Phase III, placebo-controlled, double-masked, randomized clinical
trials were conducted at a total of six separate centers using the CAC
model of allergic conjunctivitis. The same study design was employed for
both clinical trials, with subjects randomly assigned to either BBOS
1.5% (n=78) or placebo (n=79) treatment. Each subject received one eye
drop of the test agent bilaterally at different study visits 15 minutes,
8 hours, or 16 hours prior to a CAC. Primary ocular end points included
changes in ocular itching reported at 3, 5, and 7 minutes and
conjunctival hyperemia assessed at 7, 15, and 20 minutes following each
CAC. Secondary ocular end points included chemosis as well as episcleral
and ciliary hyperemia judged by investigators, and tearing (scored as
either absent or present) and eyelid swelling judged by subjects.

## Results

A statistically significant reduction in ocular itching was observed for
BBOS 1.5% treatment compared to placebo at all time points
(*P*\<0.0001), while measures for onset and 8-hour persistence of action
also reached clinical significance (ie, ≥1.0 unit difference) at a
majority of time points. In addition, a significant reduction in
conjunctival hyperemia was achieved at a majority of time points during
the onset of action CAC test. Secondary end points were also
significantly improved compared to placebo, most prominently for reduced
tearing at all study visits and reduced eyelid swelling at the onset of
action and 8-hour study visits. Adverse events were generally mild and
transient.

## Conclusion

BBOS 1.5% rapidly reduced CAC-induced ocular itching with duration of
effectiveness of at least 8 hours after dosing. Certain secondary signs
of inflammation were also significantly reduced.

# Results

## Subject characteristics

Subject demographics were well balanced between the BBOS 1.5% and
placebo treatment groups ([Table 2](#)). No significant differences were
found in the pair-wise comparison of the demographic characteristics
between the BBOS 1.5% and placebo treatment groups.

## Subject disposition

A total of 439 subjects were screened as part of either the single-site
or the multicenter trials. Of those, 202 subjects were excluded at visit
1 or visit 2 because they did not meet all of the inclusion criteria
([Figure 1](#)). A total of 237 patients were subsequently enrolled and
assigned to treatment groups according to a computer-generated
randomization code at visit 3A. A third treatment arm that was not
included in this analysis of pooled data, BBOS 1.0%, accounted for 80 of
these subjects and has been previously discussed.[33](#),[34](#) The
remaining 157 subjects comprised the intent-to-treat population. Of
these, 140 subjects completed the study without a significant protocol
deviation, and thus this subgroup constituted the per protocol
population.

## Efficacy

### Ocular itching

For the PP population, the differences in mean ocular itching scores
between the BBOS 1.5% and the placebo group were found to be
statistically significant (*P*\<0.001) at all visits and time points by
the Wilcoxon rank-sum test and across all time points at a study visit
by ANCOVA assessments ([Table 3](#)). In addition, the onset and 8-hour
persistence-of-action measures were also clinically significant at all
time points. A comparison of the difference between onset and 8-hour
persistence-of-action scores shows that the treatment effect remained
relatively constant over this time period (differences of 1.4--1.6 units
at onset, and 1.3--1.5 units at 8 hours). Differences in mean ocular
itching scores for BBOS 1.5% compared to placebo for the 16-hour
persistence-of-action measures were also statistically significant
(*P*\<0.001) at all time points; however, the range of differences did
not reach ≥1.0 unit difference at a majority of time points, the
standard prospectively designated as clinically significant.

[Figure 2A](#) shows the data for ocular itching scores by degree of
resolution of itching (itching score =0), and demonstrates that more
subjects in the BBOS 1.5% group compared to those in the placebo group
experienced complete relief of CAC-induced ocular itching. BBOS 1.5% was
statistically superior to placebo at all CAC visits. In addition, the
majority of BBOS 1.5% subjects reported zero itching at the onset of
action as early as 3 minutes after a CAC. Total itching relief was
sustained at the 8-hour persistence-of-action visit for one-third of all
subjects. In addition, a sizable number of subjects experienced complete
relief from ocular itch even at the 16-hour persistence-of-action visit.

[Figure 2B](#) shows the proportion of severely allergic subjects
(baseline \[visit 2\] ocular itching scores ≥3) who experienced complete
resolution of CAC-induced ocular itching. The data demonstrate that the
extent of complete relief was significantly better for BBOS 1.5% than
for placebo at all study visits and was comparable to the results of the
entire PP population, as seen in [Figure 2A](#).

### Conjunctival hyperemia

[Table 4](#) shows the differences in mean conjunctival hyperemia scores
for the PP population. Numerical reduction in hyperemia scores was
superior for BBOS 1.5% compared to placebo at almost all time points.
Statistically significant differences were seen at a majority of time
points for the onset-of-action CAC test. However, the criterion for
clinical significance (≥1.0 unit reduction) was not met at any study
visit.

### Secondary efficacy variables

Consistent improvements in several secondary efficacy variables were
seen with BBOS 1.5% compared to placebo. Data for ocular tearing were
notable and are summarized in [Table 5](#). The percentage of subjects
exhibiting tearing in response to a CAC ranged from 23%--39% from onset
of action to 16 hours after drug instillation in placebo-treated eyes
compared to 6%--15% from onset of action up to 16 hours after drug
instillation in BBOS 1.5%-treated eyes. This reduction was both
statistically and clinically significant for all time points measured.

Additional end points, including ciliary and episcleral hyperemia,
chemosis, and eyelid swelling, are summarized in [Table 6](#). All
measures showed improvement for BBOS 1.5% compared to placebo based upon
reduced mean scores. In particular, all of the end points showed
statistically significant reductions by BBOS 1.5% at the onset-of-action
CAC test for either all time points (chemosis and eyelid swelling) or
the majority of the assessed time points (ciliary and episcleral
hyperemia), and the results for ciliary and episcleral hyperemia were
very similar to those seen for conjunctival hyperemia. Eyelid swelling
was significantly reduced by BBOS 1.5% at all of the 8-hour
persistence-of-action time points.

## Safety

The AEs from these studies were based upon a safety population of all
subjects who received at least one instillation of BBOS 1.5% or placebo.
Overall, there were a total of 24 AEs in the PP population reported for
the BBOS 1.5% treatment group and ten AEs in the placebo treatment group
([Table 7](#)). AEs in the PP population were generally non-ocular and
not considered related to the test agent. The most common non-ocular AEs
included nasopharyngitis (n=3 for both treatment groups) and a mild
taste upon instillation for the BBOS 1.5% treatment group (n=4). Among
the few AEs that were ocular, the most commonly reported was eye
irritation, which was seen in both the placebo (n=2) and BBOS 1.5% (n=3)
treatment groups. In addition, visits throughout both CAC trials
included an ocular examination by slit-lamp biomicroscopy for each
subject, and there were no clinically significant findings reported in
the course of these examinations.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Demographics for per-protocol population
:::

                                      BBOS 1.5% (N=70)   Placebo (N=70)   All subjects (N=140)
  ----------------------------------- ------------------ ---------------- ----------------------
  Age (years)                                                             
   Mean (SD)                          38.3 (16.9)        37.1 (13.5)      37.7 (15.2)
   Median                             39                 39               39
   Min--max                           11--73             13--65           11--73
   *P*-value[a](#)                    0.644                               
  Sex, N (%)                                                              
   Female                             35 (50.0)          41 (58.6)        76 (54.3)
   Male                               35 (50.0)          29 (41.4)        64 (45.7)
   *P*-value[b](#)                    0.396                               
  Ethnicity, N (%)                                                        
   Hispanic                           3 (4.3)            4 (5.7)          7 (5.0)
   Non-hispanic                       67 (95.7)          66 (94.3)        133 (95.0)
   *P*-value[b](#)                    1.000                               
  Race, N (%)                                                             
   African American                   5 (7.2)            5 (7.2)          10 (7.1)
   American Indian or Alaska Native   0 (0.0)            0.0 (0)          0 (0.0)
   Asian                              6 (8.6)            6 (8.6)          12 (8.6)
   Caucasian                          57 (81.4)          59 (84.3)        116 (82.9)
   Other                              2 (2.9)            0 (0.0)          2 (1.4)
   *P*-value[b](#)                    0.753                               
  Iris color,[c](#) n (%)             (n=140)            (n=140)          (n=140)
   Blue                               54 (38.6)          44 (31.4)        98 (35.0)
   Brown                              58 (41.4)          70 (50.0)        128 (45.7)
   Green                              12 (8.6)           12 (8.6)         24 (8.6)
   Hazel                              16 (11.4)          12 (8.6)         28 (10.0)
   Other                              0 (0.0)            2 (1.4)          2 (0.7)
   *P*-value[b](#)                    0.347                               

**Notes:**

*P*-value calculated using two-sample *t*-test comparing BBOS 1.5% to
placebo.

*P*-value calculated using Fisher's exact test comparing BBOS 1.5% to
placebo.

Values and percentages based upon number of eyes.

**Abbreviations:** BBOS, bepotastine besilate ophthalmic solution;
min--max, minimum--maximum; N, number of subjects; n, number of eyes;
SD, standard deviation.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Differences in mean ocular itching scores (observed data only) for
subjects in the per-protocol population instilling BBOS 1.5% or placebo
eye drops in each eye following a CAC
:::

                                            Time of itching grading post-CAC   Placebo mean score (n)   BBOS 1.5% mean score (n)   Difference in mean itching score (placebo -- BBOS 1.5%)[\*](#)
  ----------------------------------------- ---------------------------------- ------------------------ -------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------
  Visit 5: 15-min onset of action           3 min                              1.9 (70)                 0.4 (70)                   1.5
  5 min                                     2.1 (70)                           0.5 (70)                 1.6                        
  7 min                                     1.9 (70)                           0.5 (70)                 1.4                        
  Visit 4: 8-hour persistence of action     3 min                              2.1 (67)                 0.8 (64)                   1.4
  5 min                                     2.3 (67)                           0.8 (64)                 1.5                        
  7 min                                     2.1 (67)                           0.8 (64)                 1.3                        
  Visit 3B: 16-hour persistence of action   3 min                              2.0 (70)                 1.2 (68)                   0.8
  5 min                                     2.3 (70)                           1.3 (67)                 1.0                        
  7 min                                     2.1 (69)                           1.2 (68)                 0.9                        

**Notes:** Itching was graded by subjects in each eye at the indicated
times post-CAC. Instillation of BBOS 1.5% or placebo occurred at 15 min,
8 hours, or 16 hours prior to a CAC for each subject.

*P*\<0.0001 by Wilcoxon rank-sum test at each time point for all study
visits and for ANCOVA analyses across all time points at a study visit.

**Abbreviations:** ANCOVA, analysis of covariance; BBOS, bepotastine
besilate ophthalmic solution; CAC, conjunctival allergen challenge; min,
minute(s); n, number of subjects providing ocular itching grades at a
study visit time point.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Differences in mean conjunctival hyperemia scores (observed data only)
for subjects in the per-protocol population instilling BBOS 1.5% or
placebo eye drops in each eye following a CAC
:::

                                            Time of hyperemia grading post-CAC   Placebo mean score (n)   BBOS 1.5% mean score (n)   Difference in mean hyperemia score (placebo -- BBOS 1.5%)   *P*-value[a](#) for difference
  ----------------------------------------- ------------------------------------ ------------------------ -------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------
  Visit 5: 15-min onset of action           7 min                                1.9 (70)                 1.3 (70)                   0.6                                                         \<0.0001
  15 min                                    2.0 (70)                             1.6 (70)                 0.4                        0.0012                                                      
  20 min                                    1.9 (70)                             1.6 (70)                 0.3                        0.0382                                                      
  Visit 4: 8-hour persistence of action     7 min                                1.7 (67)                 1.4 (64)                   0.3                                                         0.0062
  15 min                                    1.8 (67)                             1.6 (64)                 0.3                        0.0716                                                      
  20 min                                    1.8 (67)                             1.6 (64)                 0.2                        0.1601                                                      
  Visit 3B: 16-hour persistence of action   7 min                                1.8 (70)                 1.7 (68)                   0.1                                                         0.2168
  15 min                                    1.9 (70)                             1.8 (68)                 0.1                        0.5481                                                      
  20 min                                    1.8 (70)                             1.8 (68)                 0.0                        0.9949                                                      

**Notes:** Conjunctival hyperemia was graded by the investigator for
each eye at the indicated times post-CAC. Instillation of BBOS 1.5% or
placebo occurred at 15 min, 8 hours, or 16 hours prior to a CAC for each
subject.

*P*-values were derived using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test.

**Abbreviations:** BBOS, bepotastine besilate ophthalmic solution; CAC,
conjunctival allergen challenge; min, minute(s); n, number of subjects
providing conjunctival hyperemia grades at a study visit time point.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
The number and percentage of eyes in the per-protocol population for
which tearing was present at the indicated times for placebo-treated
compared to BBOS 1.5%-treated eyes
:::

                                            Time of tearing grading post-CAC   Number of eyes with tearing present   Difference in % of eyes with tearing (placebo -- BBOS 1.5%)   *P*-value for difference   
  ----------------------------------------- ---------------------------------- ------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------- ----------
  Placebo (n=140) (%)                       BBOS 1.5% (n=140) (%)                                                                                                                                             
  Visit 5: 15-min onset of action           7 min                              55 (39)                               9 (6)                                                         33                         \<0.0001
  15 min                                    38 (27)                            11 (8)                                19                                                            \<0.0001                   
  20 min                                    38 (27)                            13 (9)                                18                                                            0.0002                     
  Visit 4: 8-hour persistence of action     7 min                              55 (39)                               13 (9)                                                        30                         \<0.0001
  15 min                                    55 (39)                            9 (6)                                 33                                                            \<0.0001                   
  20 min                                    38 (27)                            13 (9)                                18                                                            0.0003                     
  Visit 3B: 16-hour persistence of action   7 min                              46 (33)                               21 (15)                                                       18                         0.0008
  15 min                                    45 (32)                            12 (9)                                23                                                            \<0.0001                   
  20 min                                    32 (23)                            12 (9)                                14                                                            0.0016                     

**Note:***P*-values were derived using Fisher's exact test and applying
multiplicity corrections derived using the false discovery rate method.

**Abbreviations:** BBOS, bepotastine besilate ophthalmic solution; CAC,
conjunctival allergen challenge; min, minute(s); n, number of eyes.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Differences in mean secondary end point values (placebo -- BBOS 1.5%)
assessed following a CAC (per-protocol population)
:::

  Mean grade differences: placebo -- BBOS 1.5%                  Ciliary hyperemia   Episcleral hyperemia   Chemosis          Eyelid swelling
  ---------------------------------------------- -------------- ------------------- ---------------------- ----------------- -----------------
  Visit 5: 15-min onset of action                7 min          0.54 (\<0.001)      0.59 (\<0.0001)        0.27 (\<0.001)    0.38 (0.0001)
  15 min                                         0.38 (0.004)   0.43 (0.002)        0.24 (0.011)           0.37 (\<0.001)    
  20 min                                         0.19 (0.188)   0.27 (0.057)        0.32 (0.002)           0.40 (\<0.0001)   
  Visit 4: 8-hour persistence of action          7 min          0.39 (0.004)        0.37 (0.049)           0.22 (0.011)      0.39 (0.0001)
  15 min                                         0.27 (0.073)   0.26 (0.082)        0.16 (0.058)           0.49 (\<0.001)    
  20 min                                         0.23 (0.164)   0.16 (0.259)        0.17 (0.092)           0.43 (0.002)      
  Visit 3B: 16-hour persistence of action        7 min          0.19 (0.178)        0.22 (0.060)           0.16 (0.078)      0.30 (0.008)
  15 min                                         0.15 (0.436)   0.18 (0.277)        0.27 (0.007)           0.46 (\<0.001)    
  20 min                                         0.15 (0.288)   0.07 (0.728)        0.25 (0.035)           0.29 (0.023)      

**Notes:** Values in parentheses represent *P*-values for significance
of mean values for the BBOS 1.5% treatment group (n=70) compared to the
placebo treatment group (n=70) and were derived using observed data only
and applying the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Measures were considered
statistically significant at a study visit if a majority of time points
exhibited *P*≤0.0125 (visit 5) or *P*≤0.00625 (visit 3B and visit 4).

**Abbreviations:** BBOS, bepotastine besilate ophthalmic solution; CAC,
conjunctival allergen challenge; min, minute(s).
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
AEs in the per-protocol population
:::

  AEs                                    Placebo (N=70)   BBOS 1.5% (N=70)
  -------------------------------------- ---------------- ------------------
  Total AEs                              10               24
  AEs considered related to test agent   3                8
  **Ocular AEs**                                          
  Eye irritation                         2                3
  Foreign body sensation                 1                0
  Conjunctival cyst                      0                1[a](#)
  Trace SPK                              0                1[a](#)

**Note:**

Adverse event considered unrelated to instillation of test agent.

**Abbreviations:** AE, adverse event; BBOS, bepotastine besilate
ophthalmic solution 1.5%; N, number of subjects; SPK, superficial
punctate keratitis.
::::
