Abstract

## Background

It is important that potential study participants are appropriately
informed and understand what is involved with their research
participation. A few studies have examined study participants'
understanding of the informed consent process and the adequacy of the
information they received when agreeing to participate in a randomised
controlled trial. Deficiencies in the consent process have been found.
This topic remains an under researched area of acupuncture research. The
aim of this study was to examine participants' understanding of their
informed consent and the adequacy of the information presented when
agreeing to participate in a randomised controlled trial of acupuncture.

## Methods

All women who participated in a randomised controlled trial over an
11 month period were invited to participate in a survey. An anonymous
self-completion questionnaire was designed and covered participants'
understanding of informed consent in the clinical trial, their views of
the information provided, the opportunity to ask questions, the use of
sham acupuncture, their recall of study visits and processes for
withdrawal, and their reason for participating in the trial.

## Results

A response rate of 59 % was obtained. Over 90 % of subjects indicated
there was plenty of opportunity to discuss the study prior to giving
consent, and 89 % indicated that questions asked were answered to their
satisfaction. The majority of women indicated the amount of information
describing acupuncture was about right, however 24 % would have liked
more. Information describing sham acupuncture was not considered
adequate by 48 % of women, and 35 % would have liked more information,
30 % could not recall why, or were uncertain why a sham group was used.
Participants indicated less understanding of the information relating to
payment if they became ill due to study participation, risks and
discomforts from the study interventions, which of the procedures were
experimental and for how long they would be involved in the study.

## Conclusion

Trial participants' understanding of informed consent was overall
satisfactory but highlighted some areas of deficiency. Future studies
could consider use of supplementary material such as Q and A fact
sheets.

# Results

A total of 353 questionnaires were sent out and responses were received
from 210 participants giving a response rate of 59 %. Responses to the
survey indicated representation across Australian States and
Territories, and from our three overseas recruitment sites in New
Zealand. The majority of women completing the survey were aged over
35 years, and the majority were highly educated (Table [1](#)).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Demographic characteristics of study participants
:::

  Demographics                    Survey population   
  ------------------------------- ------------------- ------
  *n* = 210                       \%                  
  Age (year)                                          
    \<35                          74                  35.2
    35--44                        120                 57.1
    Missing data                  14                  6.6
  Place of residence                                  
   New Zealand                    69                  32.8
   South Australia                45                  21.4
   New South Wales                40                  19.0
   Victoria                       36                  17.1
   Australian Capital Territory   11                  5.2
   Queensland                     7                   3.3
   Missing                        2                   0.9
  Education                                           
   Did not finish high school     9                   4.2
   High School Certificate        22                  10.4
   Vocational training            42                  20.0
   University degree              121                 57.6
   Missing                        16                  7.6
::::

All women indicated the primary reason for participating in the study
was the they hoped acupuncture would improve their chance of having a
baby. In addition 61 women (29 %) indicated the importance of
undertaking research as a key reason for joining the trial. We sought
women's views about the information they received and the opportunity to
ask questions when considering their involvement in the study
(Table [2](#)). Over 90 % indicated there was enough opportunity to
discuss the study with the clinical staff before deciding to join the
trial, and 89 % indicated that any questions they asked were answered to
their satisfaction. The majority of women indicated the information
describing acupuncture was about right, however 48 (24 %) would have
liked more (Table [2](#)). Information describing sham acupuncture was
not considered adequate by approximately half of the women, and 35 %
would have liked more information. The role of educational status was
examined in response these questions and we found women with tertiary
education would have liked more information on acupuncture
(*p* \< 0.009), no other associations were found.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Views of information presented on the study
:::

  Participation in the trial                    *N* = 210   \%
  --------------------------------------------- ----------- ------
  Opportunity to ask question                               
  Yes plenty of time                            191         91.0
  No little opportunity                         11          5.2
  I can't remember                              8           3.8
  Questions answered to your satisfaction                   
  Yes completely                                140         66.7
  Yes mainly                                    49          23.3
  No I wasn't happy with the answers            1           0.5
  I didn't ask any questions                    17          8.1
  I can't remember                              3           3.8
  Information on acupuncture (*n* = 198)                    
  It was about right                            142         71.7
  I would have liked more                       48          24.2
  Information too detailed                      4           2.0
  I can't remember                              4           2.0
  Information on sham acupuncture (*n* = 198)               
  It was about right                            104         52.5
  I would have liked more                       70          35.4
  I can't remember                              20          10.1
  Information too detailed                      4           2.0
::::

# Understanding of the patient information

We asked about participants' understanding of the study based upon the
written information they received and follow up verbal interaction with
study staff (Table [3](#) Appendix 1, question 5). The majority of
participants clearly understood what the study involved with overall
mean scores of 4 in response to these questions. There were five areas
in which participants indicated less understanding, these related to
payment if they became ill due to their participation in the study,
risks and discomforts from the study interventions, which of the
procedures were experimental and for how long they would be involved in
the study. In addition, over 75 % recalled they were required to attend
for treatment on two occasions, and 50 % could accurately recall when
they were required to complete questionnaires.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Participants understanding of the study
:::

  *n* = 199                                                                    Mean   SD
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -----
  The fact that participation is voluntary                                     4.6    1.0
  That your treatment involved research                                        4.5    1.0
  What the researchers were trying to find out                                 4.3    1.0
  Treatments and procedures you would undergo                                  4.3    1.0
  How your participation may benefit future patients                           4.3    1.0
  Possible benefits from participating in the trial                            4.2    1.1
  Overall how well you understood the study when you signed the consent form   4.2    1.0
  Who to contact if you have questions                                         4.3    1.1
  Possible trial risks and discomforts                                         3.8    1.2
  How long you would be in the trial                                           3.8    1.1
  Which treatments were experimental                                           3.7    1.2
  Alternatives to participation in the trial                                   3.6    1.4
  Who will pay for treatment if you become ill/injured                         3.0    1.5
::::

We explored participants' understanding of selected areas relating to
questions about the trial and the research terminology used in the
patient information sheets through open-ended questions. Participant
responses indicated some deficiencies. Over 82 % of responses indicated
women could recall what a RCT meant. Responses were illustrated by the
following quotations *"I will be selected at random to be in the real or
sham acupuncture group to assess the effect of acupuncture on live birth
rates"*. Many participants responded indicating their understanding of
randomisation and blinding, for example, *"that the person is randomly
picked to be in the sham or real acupuncture group", "I will be
allocated to either a treatment or a control group, blind study means I
won't be aware of which group I was allocated to"*. Some subjects
responded by discussing the randomisation process, "*its like a name in
a hat you get randomly drawn to have either real or placebo
acupuncture",* and *" where a computer randomly selects which group you
will be in"*. Incorrect responses reflected responses relating to
blinding *" no one knows which group you are in", participants receive
either sham or actual treatment without knowing which one"*, or general
responses relating to the purpose of the study "*its a experiment used
to test the effectiveness of something in this case the acupuncture
meridians on the pregnancy success rates in IVF patients".*

We asked why was sham acupuncture used? Thirty percent could not recall
why or were uncertain, and 69 % provided an explanation. Many described
it in terms of a non-specific effect relating it to the placebo effect,
*"because it was the placebo treatment, you need to see whether the
outcomes would be affected by receiving acupuncture or not", "to rule
out the placebo effect, or to rule it in", "to see if it is all in the
mind"*. Others indicated their understanding of the use of a control
group, *" to determine if real acupuncture does actually cause more
pregnancies", "as a control group to eliminate changes caused by bias or
belief", "to see if specific points had results that can be compared
against the sham results". "Sham acupuncture is used to control for the
physiological and psychological effects".*

Fifty nine percent of participants indicated they could not recall the
process to withdraw from the study with an additional 16 % responding
they were unclear. Of those indicating they understood the process for
withdrawing, a small number mentioned they could withdraw any time,
however the majority of participants responded to this question by
explaining they were of aware of the process to contact the site
research nurse or the trial co-ordinator to communicate their intention
to withdraw.

Recall of the potential risks and side effects was poor. Over 41 % could
not describe any side effects or risks and a further 29 % were unsure.
Twenty eight percent of women listed side effects, with the majority
accurately recalling acupuncture side effects listed on the information
sheet including slight discomfort, pain from needling, and the less
frequently occurring events relation to feeling lighted heads, nausea,
and dizziness. Five inaccurately recalled a risk of infection.
