Abstract

Deficits in social cognition including facial affect recognition and
their detrimental effects on functional outcome are well established in
schizophrenia. Structured training can have substantial effects on
social cognitive measures including facial affect recognition.
Elucidating training effects on cortical mechanisms involved in facial
affect recognition may identify causes of dysfunctional facial affect
recognition in schizophrenia and foster remediation strategies. In the
present study, 57 schizophrenia patients were randomly assigned to (a)
computer-based facial affect training that focused on affect
discrimination and working memory in 20 daily 1-hour sessions, (b)
similarly intense, targeted cognitive training on auditory-verbal
discrimination and working memory, or (c) treatment as usual.
Neuromagnetic activity was measured before and after training during a
dynamic facial affect recognition task (5 s videos showing human faces
gradually changing from neutral to fear or to happy expressions).
Effects on 10--13 Hz (alpha) power during the transition from neutral to
emotional expressions were assessed via MEG based on previous findings
that alpha power increase is related to facial affect recognition and is
smaller in schizophrenia than in healthy subjects. Targeted affect
training improved overt performance on the training tasks. Moreover,
alpha power increase during the dynamic facial affect recognition task
was larger after affect training than after treatment-as-usual, though
similar to that after targeted perceptual--cognitive training,
indicating somewhat nonspecific benefits. Alpha power modulation was
unrelated to general neuropsychological test performance, which improved
in all groups. Results suggest that specific neural processes supporting
facial affect recognition, evident in oscillatory phenomena, are
modifiable. This should be considered when developing remediation
strategies targeting social cognition in schizophrenia.

# Results

*Clinical status*improved in all three SZ groups independent of type of
intervention: general function (GAF *F* (2,53) = 16.92, *p*  \< .001),
positive symptoms (PANSS-P *F* (2,53) = 17.92, *p*  \< .001), and
general symptoms (PANSS-G *F* (2,53) = 10.30, *p*  \< .001; PANSS-N
n.s.). There were no effects involving Intervention.

## MEG during FAR criterion task prior to intervention

[Fig. 2](#)illustrates time--frequency representation (TFR) of power
during face morphing prior to intervention. The HC19 group TFR showed an
increase from baseline in the 10--13 Hz range between 1 s (morph onset)
and 3.5 s after stimulus onset, with maximum around 3 s. This increase
was not evident in any SZ group. Statistical comparisons ( [Fig. 2](#) ,
bottom) confirmed significant differences between HC19 and
pre-intervention SZ in alpha-power increase over a central sensor
cluster in the time course from 2.5 to 3.5 s after stimulus onset.

*FAT task performance*was poorer in SZ during their first FAT session
than in the HC24 group during their one FAT session (same-different task
*F* (1,41) = 7.69, *p* = .008; blended emotion task *F* (1,41) = 8.24,
*p* = .006; emotion sequence task *F* (1,41) = 16.11, *p*  \< .001;
emotion location task *F* (1,41) = 16.19, *p*  \< .001; [Fig. 3](#) A).
Performance improved with training on all four tasks in the FAT group,
significantly in three tasks ( [Fig. 3B](#) , left): same/different, *F*
(1,18) = 4.99, *p* = .04; blended emotion *F* (1,18) = 10.17, *p*
= .005; emotion sequence *F* (1,18) = 3.28, *p* = .09; emotion location
*F* (1,18) = 13.12, *p* = .002. In the last FAT training session, SZ no
longer differed significantly from HC24 on three of the four tasks. SZ
still performed worse in the emotion location task ( *F* (1,41) = 6.72,
*p* = .01; see also effect sizes in [Fig. 3B](#) , right).

## FAT impact on MEG during FAR criterion task

An Emotion × Time analysis of the FAT group produced a main effect of
Time, *F* (1,18) = 5.61, *p* = .03 ( *p* = .02), reflecting a greater
increase in alpha power from prestimulus baseline during the
pre-recognition period of the FAR criterion task after training than
before training ( [Fig. 4](#) , left). Here and below, no effects
involving Emotion emerged.

Pre-training, a Group (FAT pre-training vs. HC19) × Emotion analysis
indicated smaller alpha power increase in SZ than in HC19 ( *F* (1,36)
= 22.05, *p*  \< .001; [Fig. 3](#) ). A similar comparison of FAT
post-training vs. HC19 verified this effect (Group *F* (1,36) = 5.73,
*p* = .02). Effect sizes indicated larger differences in alpha power
modulation prior to FAT (fearful condition *g* = 1.29, happy condition
*g* = 1.08) than after FAT (fearful condition *g* = .66, happy condition
*g* = .58). Thus, dysfunctional oscillatory dynamics can be improved by
FAT, though not to full normalization.

## Specificity of intervention effects

[Fig. 4](#)illustrates the change in alpha power increase after
intervention in the three patient groups. An Intervention (FAT vs.
TAU) × Emotion × Time analysis produced a marginal effect of Time, *F*
(1,36) = 2.80, *p* = .1 ( *p*  \> .1), reflecting some general
improvement over time in the pooled sample, and an Intervention × Time
interaction, *F* (1,36) = 4.78, *p* = .04 ( *p* = .05), reflecting
improvement in the FAT group ( [Fig. 4](#) , left) vs. a nonsignificant
decline in the TAU group ( [Fig. 4](#) , right). Thus, changes in alpha
power modulation were specific to training. Here and below, no main
effects of Intervention emerged. That was as anticipated, given random
assignment to group, with group variance therefore expected only in
Intervention × Time effects.

The final a priori ANOVA assessed whether this improvement in alpha
response with active training was specific to FAT. An Intervention (FAT
vs. CE) × Emotion × Time analysis produced an effect of Time, *F* (1,36)
= 8.54, *p* = .006 ( *p* = .008), reflecting improvement with training,
but no Intervention × Time interaction, indicating similar improvement
in the two active treatment groups ( [Fig. 4](#) ).

## Omnibus test

An omnibus Intervention (FAT, CE, TAU) × Emotion × Time analysis is of
some value as a control for experiment-wise error. Because the primary
relevant hypothesis such an analysis addresses, that intervention
improves brain function, is directional, a one-tailed test of the Time
effect would be appropriate, or equivalently a *p* = .10 criterion for
the ANOVA effect. The Time effect exceeded that criterion, *F* (1,54)
= 4.81, *p* = .03 ( *p* = .06), with alpha power increase from
prestimulus baseline during the pre-recognition period of the FAR
criterion task larger after training than before training. A secondary
hypothesis that an omnibus test could address is that interventions
differed in their impact, thus a nondirectional Intervention × Time
effect, which was marginal, *F* (2,54) = 2.44, *p*  \< .10 ( *p* = .10).
However, the motivation for the present study was the series of
specific, directional, a priori hypotheses provided above, which, to
achieve partial experiment-wise error protection, were tested with a
two-tailed criterion.

## Relationship of FAT performance and alpha activity on the FAR criterion task

In the FAT group, alpha power increase in a left fronto-central sensor
cluster ( [Fig. 5](#) left panel) varied with performance improvement
during the blended emotion task ( *r* = .46, *p*  \< .05; [Fig. 5](#)
right panel).

## Neuropsychological test performance

As expected in an SZ sample (e.g., [Kern et al., 2008, 2011](#) ),
patient performance was below the normative *T* -score of 50 and varied
by MCCB Domain ( *F* (6,324) = 12.83, *p*  \< .001, HF = .94). MCCB
performance generally improved after intervention (Time *F* (1,54)
= 28.45, *p*  \< .001). A Domain × Time interaction ( *F* (6,324)
= 4.05, *p* = .001, HF = .91) reflected improvement in Processing Speed
( *F* (1,56) = 33.56, *p*  \< .01), Attentional Vigilance ( *F* (1,56)
= 15.82, *p*  \< .01), and Visual Learning ( *F* (1,56) = 11.99, *p*
= .001) but not in Working Memory, Verbal Learning, Reasoning, or Social
Cognition (see [Table 2](#) for normative *T* -scores). There was a
Time × Intervention effect, *F* (2,54) = 3.70, *p* = .03, resulting from
significant performance improvement on Reasoning after CE, *t* (18)
= 2.06, *p* = .05, not after FAT or TAU. There was no
Time × Intervention × Domain effect ( *F* (12, 324) = 1.28, *p*  \> .1).
Thus, these improvements did not depend on type of treatment. Change in
alpha power increase from baseline between pre- and post-intervention
was not related to changes in neuropsychological test performance (MCCB)
or in clinical status (symptom severity, GAF).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Demographic and clinical data (means ± standard deviation), before (pre)
and after (post) treatment for schizophrenia patients per treatment
group ( *n* = 19 per group) together with statistical differences.
:::

                           Gender (m/f)         Age                   Years of education    IQ            LQ             CPZ pre         CPZ post
  ------------------------ -------------------- --------------------- -------------------- -------------- -------------- --------------- ---------------
  FAT                      11/8                 39.6 ± 7.9            11.5 ± 1.7           108.1 ± 16.3   70.7 ± 59.0    617.2 ± 327.1   539.6 ± 289.2
  CE                       12/7                 36.0 ± 8.5            10.8 ± 1.7           102.3 ± 13.6   60.7 ± 59.1    544.6 ± 490.1   506.1 ± 344.3
  TAU                      15/4                 35.9 ± 10.6           11.3 ± 1.8           108.7 ± 17.4   59.0 ± 67.5    646.2 ± 393.9   637.9 ± 280.9
  Statistical difference   Chi ^2^ = 2.0 n.s.   *F*2,54 = 1.04 n.s.   *F*2,50 \< 1 n.s.    *F*2,54 \< 1   *F*2,54 \< 1   *F*2,53 \< 1    *F*2,50 \< 1
                                                                                                                                         

                           PANSS-P        PANSS-N        PANSS-G        GAF                                                               
  ------------------------ -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------------- -------------- --------------------
  Pre                      Post           Pre            Post           Pre            Post           Pre                  Post           
  FAT                      16.1 ± 5.2     14.4 ± 4.6     19.2 ± 6.6     17.9 ± 6.2     36.9 ± 8.4     33.2 ± 8.2           42.5 ± 12.4    46.3 ± 13.4
  CE                       15.6 ± 5.2     12.6 ± 4.2     18.0 ± 6.5     17.4 ± 6.8     35.4 ± 5.5     30.5 ± 7.1           44.7 ± 13.6    50.1 ± 13.5
  TAU                      14.7 ± 4.9     13.6 ± 6.0     19.6 ± 6.1     18.3 ± 6.2     35.1 ± 9.0     34.3 ± 9.9           41.2 ± 13.4    43.0 ± 12.2
  Statistical difference   *F*2,54 \< 1   *F*2,53 \< 1   *F*2,54 \< 1   *F*2,52 \< 1   *F*2,54 \< 1   *F*2,53 = 1.0 n.s.   *F*2,54 \< 1   *F*2,53 = 1.4 n.s.

Note: FAT: facial affect training, CE: cognitive exercise, TAU:
treatment as usual; LQ: laterality quotient; CPZ: chlorpromazine
equivalents; PANSS: Positive and Negative Symptom Scale (26); GAF:
Global Assessment of Functioning (DSM-IV axis V); pre: before
intervention onset; post: after 4-week intervention period; n.s.: *p*
 \> .1.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
MATRICS consensus cognitive battery (MCCB) test scores (means ± standard
deviation of normative *T* -scores) for the seven MCCB domains before
(pre) and after (post) intervention period for the three schizophrenia
patients group ( *n* = 19 per group).
:::

                                             Processing speed   Attentional vigilance   Working memory   Verbal learning   Visual learning   Reasoning     Social cognition   Overall composite
  ------------------------ ----------------- ------------------ ----------------------- ---------------- ----------------- ----------------- ------------- ------------------ -------------------
  FAT                      Pre               39.5 ± 10.6        33.6 ± 11.5             44.6 ± 10.2      46.2 ± 9.9        42.8 ± 12.8       44.5 ± 10.7   39.3 ± 11.1        36.1 ± 10.5
  Post                     44.6 ± 12.2       38.5 ± 11.8        48.2 ± 9.2              47.1 ± 10.0      49.4 ± 14.0       47.9 ± 8.8        39.3 ± 10.4   41.6 ± 11.5        
  CE                       Pre               40.1 ± 14.4        38.8 ± 10.3             48.9 ± 10.7      45.9 ± 11.3       42.3 ± 17.5       46.3 ± 10.6   39.1 ± 8.5         38.6 ± 14.0
  Post                     44.2 ± 13.5       41.7 ± 13.7        48.9 ± 14.7             45.0 ± 12.0      50.3 ± 13.8       49.7 ± 10.4       38.5 ± 10.8   42.3 ± 15.9        
  TAU                      Pre               41.8 ± 11.1        36.6 ± 10.5             47.9 ± 13.0      48.2 ± 10.7       43.9 ± 13.0       49.3 ± 10.1   40.2 ± 11.3        39.9 ± 12.3
  Post                     48.2 ± 12.3       41.3 ± 10.1        50.8 ± 12.1             47.3 ± 10.4      46.5 ± 9.8        45.4 ± 7.7        42.8 ± 11.7   43.3 ± 10.8        
  Time *F*~1,56~           33.56 [\*\*](#)   15.82 [\*\*](#)    n.s.                    \<1              11.99 [\*\*](#)   \<1               \<1           28.32 [\*\*](#)    
  Group *F*~2,54~          \<1               \<1                \<1                     \<1              \<1               \<1               \<1           \<1                
  Group × Time *F*~2,54~   \<1               \<1                1.1                     \<1              \<1               3.70 [\*](#)      \<1           \<1                

Note: n.s.: *p*  \> .1.

*p*\< .05.

*p*\< .01.
::::
